---
title: "Inverse asymptotic treatment: Capturing discontinuities in fluid flows via equation modification"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-01-01-paper-1
excerpt: 
date: 2023-01-01
venue: 'Journal of Computational Science'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2023.102141'
citation: 'S. Mirjalili, <b>S. Taverniers</b>, H. Collis, M. Behandish, and A. Mani. Inverse asymptotic treatment: capturing discontinuities in fluid flows via equation modification. <i>Submitted for review</i>, (2023).'
---

## Abstract

A major challenge in developing accurate and robust numerical solutions to multi-physics problems is to correctly model evolving discontinuities in field quantities. These manifest themselves as interfaces between different phases in multi-phase flows, or as shock and contact discontinuities in (either single- or multi-phase) compressible flows. A plethora of bespoke discretization schemes have been developed to capture both types of discontinuities in physics-based simulations. However, when a quick response is required to rapidly emerging challenges such as the need to design novel hypersonic vehicles, the complexity of such implementations impedes a swift transition from problem formulation to computation. This is exacerbated by the need to compose multiple interacting physics, which may cause specialized schemes to break unexpectedly as governing equations need to be changed and/or added. We introduce "inverse asymptotic treatment" (IAT) as a unified framework for capturing discontinuities in fluid flows that enables building directly computable models based on standard, off-the-shelf numerics. By capturing discontinuities through modifications at the level of the governing equations, rather than via reliance on specialized discretization schemes, IAT can seemlessly handle additional physics and thus makes it easier for novice end users to quickly obtain numerical results for a variety of multi-physics scenarios. This strategy also facilitates the use of a "multi-physics" compiler that automates the conversion of the modified PDEs to numerical source code readable by popular computational frameworks like OpenFOAM. We outline IAT in the context of phase-field modeling of two-phase incompressible flows, and then demonstrate its generality by showing how localized artificial diffusivity (LAD) methods for single-phase compressible flows can be viewed as instances of IAT. Through the real-world example of a laminar hypersonic compression corner, we illustrate IAT’s ability to, within a span of just a few months, generate a directly computable model whose wall metrics predictions for sufficiently small corner angles come close to that of NASA’s state-of-the-art VULCAN-CFD solver. Finally, we propose a novel LAD approach via "reverse-engineered" PDE modifications, inspired by total variation diminishing (TVD) flux limiters, to eliminate the problem-dependent parameter tuning that plagues traditional LAD. Through canonical numerical tests, we demonstrate that this "limiter-inspired" LAD approach, when combined with second-order central differencing, can robustly and accurately model compressible flows.