---
title: "A finite element method to compute the damping rate of oscillating fluids inside microfluidic nozzles"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-01-01-paper-2
excerpt: 
date: 2023-01-01
venue: 'Journal of Computational Physics'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.00094'
citation: '<b>S. Taverniers</b>, S. Korneev, C. Somarakis, and A.J. Lew. A finite element method to compute the damping rate of oscillating fluids inside microfluidic nozzles. <i>Submitted for review</i>, (2023).'
---

## Abstract

We introduce a finite element method for computing the damping rate of fluid oscillations in nozzles of drop-on-demand (DoD) microfluidic devices. Accurate knowledge of the damping rates for the least-damped oscillation modes following droplet ejection is paramount for assessing jetting stability at higher jetting frequencies, as ejection from a non-quiescent meniscus can result in deviations from nominal droplet properties. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations often struggle to accurately predict meniscus damping in the limit of low viscosity and high surface tension. Moreover, their use in design loops aimed at optimizing the nozzle geometry for stable jetting is slow and computationally expensive. The faster alternative we adopt here is to compute the damping rate directly from the eigenvalues of the linearized problem. Starting from a variational formulation of the linearized governing equations, we obtain a generalized eigenvalue problem for the oscillation modes, and approximate its solutions with a finite element method that uses Taylor-Hood elements. We solve the matrix eigenvalue problem with a sparse, parallelized implementation of the Krylov-Schur algorithm. The spatial shape and temporal evolution (angular frequency and damping rate) of the set of least-damped oscillation modes are obtained in a matter of minutes, compared to days for a CFD simulation. We verify that the method can reproduce an analytical benchmark problem, and then determine numerical convergence rates on two examples with axisymmetric geometry. We also prove that the method is free of spurious modes with zero or positive damping rates. The method's ability to quickly generate accurate estimates of fluid oscillation damping rates makes it suitable for integration into design loops for prototyping microfluidic nozzles.